# Ice-Cover-Forecast-using-ML-model
Forecasting the annual Ice Cover on the St.Mary's River of the Great Lakes using Machine Learning Model - XGBoost
The Laurentian Great Lakes (hereafter the Great Lakes), cover more than 94,000 square miles in the United States and Canada and are interconnected by a series of rivers, straits, and connecting channels, forming the world’s largest freshwater system. The Great Lakes waterway is a system of natural channels and artificial canals which enable navigation between the Great Lakes[1]. Among these waterways, St. Marys River is a key waterway that extends from Brush Point in the southeast corner of Lake Superior to the northwest section of Lake Huron. The massive Soo Locks and dredged channels, constructed in the St. Marys River, support navigation activities including commercial shipping in the Great Lakes. This navigational lock system is closed annually from late January to late March due to the development of ice cover over the river. However, a notable year-to-year variability in ice condition exists in the transition periods, namely when ice cover starts to form in early winter and melt in spring. This poses a challenge to safe and effective planning of shipping and icebreaking operations around the region. Consequently, it is significant to find a way to predict the ice coverage in order to help the shipping community plan their schedule in advance.
While the ice prediction for Great Lakes has been done in the past several years, most of them applied statistical and numerical modeling methods, such as Regression analysis. However, because of the focused geographical area and comlex physics in the river system, the St. Mary’s River area is not covered by these traditional models, including NOAA’s Great Lakes Operational Forecast System.  
Previous studies have shown that compared with normal statistical methods, Machine learning is more likely to detect the internal mechanisms among data, contributing to a higher prediction accuracy. In this study, Extreme Gradient Boost (XGBoost) was used for the Great Lakes’ ice prediction. The model was trained by using the four weather stations' data around the St. Mary’s River from the Coastal Marine Automated Network and the satellite-based ice coverage data from the NOAA Coastwatch Great Lakes node. Various packages implemented in Python, like Datetime, Pandas, Sklearn for data processing and Matplotlib for data visualization.  
After the model was built and prediction was conducted for the next 7 days , it forecasted the ice cover accurately during stable phase. Based on the metrics of mean absolute error and root mean square error, it was found that the model skill tended to be worse in early winter and spring months compared with the mid-winter period because of highly dynamic conditions in these periods. The differences between the original and predicted ice-on/off date are within 3-5 days for the model. XGBoost has potential to be used as a good reference for the shipping community to help them plan safe and effective operations.
